# Research Journal 09

William Findlay
Oct. 13th 2020

## iOracle: Automated Evaluation of Access Control Policies in iOS

### Paper Details

**Title:** iOracle: Automated Evaluation of Access Control Policies in iOS

**Authors:** Luke Deshotels, Răzvan Deaconescu, Costin Carabas, Iulia Mandă, William Enck, Mihai Chiroiu, Ninghui Li, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi.

**Published in:** ACM ASIA-CCS 2018

**Link to Paper:** https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3196494.3196527

**Reviewed by:** William Findlay

**Date Reviewed:** Oct. 10, 2020

### Problem

Modern operating systems like iOS often require complex security policies
comprised of multiple interacting policy frameworks and enforcement engines,
including access controls built into the operating system itself. Since these
policy creation and enforcement mechanisms may interact in complex and
non-intuitive ways, it is often very easy to misconfigure a security policy and
leave it open to attacks. This paper seeks to find a reasonable solution to this
problem by making it easier for defenders to audit policy in such a complex
environment.

### Contribution

The authors built an application, iOracle, which reverse engineers iOS security
policies pertaining to system executables and automatically constructs a logic
database (written in Prolog) to which defenders can issue high level queries
about the security properties of applications residing on the system. The
authors showed that iOracle was able to reveal information about how existing
attack vectors could have been found more easily as well as identify several
previously undiscovered attack vectors. Further, iOracle provides information
about how to modify the existing security policy to resolve these security
problems. This semi-automation of policy auditing represents a significant step
toward reducing the inherent risk of policy misconfiguration in complex
environments such as iOS.

### Adaptive Analysis

**Adaptive Score:** 1.5

**Rationale:** This research greatly helps defenders by taking what was
originally a hard problem (identifying weaknesses in a complex soup of policy
definition and enforcement mechanisms) and making it significantly easier. It
does so by providing a semi-automatic, unified approach to auditing iOS access
control policy. Attackers will have a difficult time responding to this because
the system is able to detect attack vectors before human adversaries have even
discovered them. Further, when an iOracle query identifies a vulnerability in
the security policy, it shows the defenders how the vulnerability can be fixed
using the semantics of the underlying policy language. The only way I can see to
defeat this would be to defeat the policy enforcement mechanisms themselves.
Unfortunately, since iOS is proprietary, the methodology used to collect
information about security policy and system state had to be quite hacky and the
paper acknowledges several design limitations as a result of this. For example,
iOracle might occasionally produce incorrect facts about the system and it is
limited to analysing file access only.  While I do think this paper presents an
adaptive security mechanism, I deduct 0.5 points for this reason.



## Analyzing and Comparing the Protection Quality of Security Enhanced Operating Systems

### Paper Details

**Title:** Analyzing and Comparing the Protection Quality of Security Enhanced Operating Systems

**Authors:** Hong Chen, Ninghui Li, and Ziqing Mao

**Published in:** NDSS 2009

**Link to Paper:** https://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/ninghui/papers/comparison_ndss09.pdf

**Reviewed by:** William Findlay

**Date Reviewed:** Oct. 10, 2020

### Problem

It is often difficult, particularly for non-expert users, to measure the quality
of protection offered by mandatory access control systems. It is not necessarily
clear how effectively MAC security policies can reduce an attack surface in
practise. In part, this is because the underlying policy language is often
complex and arcane, a fact which significantly undermines readability and thus
auditability. Further, comparing policies to determine their relative efficacy,
particularly across multiple policy frameworks, is not a trivial task. This
paper proposes a way to make it easier for defenders to determine the efficacy
of security policies for two of Linux's largest MAC frameworks: SELinux and
AppArmor.

### Contribution

To solve this problem, the paper introduces VulSAN, a tool for analyzing
AppArmor and SELinux MAC policies and generating a minimal list of attack paths
for compromising a system protected by the policy. These attack paths are
generated by a Prolog (logic programming language) program and expressed as
a graph representing the vulnerability surface (i.e. a graph of attack vectors
in the context of the security policy). Defenders would then be able to tune
their system configuration based on the information reported in this graph.

### Adaptive Analysis

**Adaptive Score:** 1.5

**Rationale:** This paper presents a very similar technique to the iOracle paper
above, albeit with a few key differences. VulSAN focuses on the analysis of the
two mandatory access control frameworks for Linux, as well as Linux DAC
permissions. Rather than querying security properties, queries are instead
formulated as attack goals and scenarios. An inherent limitation here is that
queries are limited to only the attack scenarios and goals that are known to the
user. Further, the attack graphs that VulSAN generates do not explicitly
describe how to fix any vulnerabilities. This is left up to the user who would
then issue another query. For these reasons., while I do think VulSAN is an
adaptive mechanism, I hesitate to give it a score of 2, so I drop it to 1.5
instead.
